Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Nikil Choudhury. He's lecturer
in in human evolutionary and behavioral ecology in the
Department of Archaeology at the University of Cambridge. And
today we're going to explore topics like cooperation in
human societies, social learning processes, breathing systems, and evolutionary
psychiatry. So, Doctor Choudary, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to have you on.
Thanks for having me. Look forward to the chow.
So, I would like to start by asking you
a bit about cooperation in human societies. First of
all, how do you approach it from an evolutionary
perspective? What are its evolutionary basis?
So, I think the first thing to outline is
why people want to study human cooperation. So. The
term is actually used in many different ways, uh,
partly because it's such an interesting phenomenon. You have
mathematicians working on this, economists, but in biology, um,
even, even within evolutionary biology, people define it slightly
differently. But I think when we're thinking about the
reason why it's interesting, we could define it in
the same way as we might define altruism. Which
is when an organism incurs a cost to their
evolutionary fitness, to provide a benefit to another organism
or other multiple other organisms. So that immediately creates
a paradox, right? If, if you think that if
by definition behavior which incurs a cost to the
fitness of the individual to uh convey a cost
to another individual, then that behavior should be selected
out by, by definition, uh, which is really. Why
evolutionists are interested in understanding the phenomenon of cooperative
or altruistic behavior. And we see that across the
animal kingdom, even bacteria, we, we see this form
of cooperation going on. But the reason anthropologists are
particularly interested in studying human cooperation. Is that it
has a couple of unique features, um, generally, in
the animal kingdom, cooperation tends to be heavily focused
within genetically related individuals. Um, BUT not always, actually,
not always at all. There are certainly cases where.
It's not exclusive, but the extent and ubiquity of
cooperation between unrelated individuals and humans is unparalleled, and
the other is the scale of it, the fact
that we cooperate with individuals we don't even know,
and for various theoretical reasons, that's, that's quite surprising.
So, uh, in your work, you've done some work,
uh, when it comes to relational wealth. Tell us
about that concept. Uh, I mean, it's relational wealth
for differential access to cooperation. What is it?
Yeah, so there was a nice. Paper in 2010
or 2012 by Monique Borgerhoff Mulder and colleagues, and
I think they were just trying to make the
point that too often when analyzing wealth, we focus
on material wealth, but if we want to understand.
The effects on fitness or well-being across societies, we
can conceptualize wealth in multiple domains. So you have
material wealth, which is the wealth we're all familiar
with, then embodied wealth, which is any form of
wealth which is kept in the body, so that
could be physical fitness or strength, but also in
the brain, so skill and knowledge, and then finally
relational wealth, which broadly. Uh, ANY benefits you can
have through your social network and from an evolutionary
perspective we're principally interested in benefits to your evolutionary
fitness that one can derive from, from a social
network and in humans and particularly hunter-gatherers who, who
I've worked with. I, I use relational wealth really
to focus on the fact that individuals vary in
their access to cooperative partnerships, and they're such a
cooperative species, that of course is important for, for
fitness.
And there's interindividual variability in relational wealth. What do
we know about it and what aspects of our
sociality does it play a role in?
Um, WELL, to some degree, the, for our sociality,
you could argue it, it's fundamental, right? When we're
thinking about the evolution of any trait, we're talking
about variability. Competitive advantage and heritability. So if you
have inter interindividual variation in relational wealth, if that
does have any effects for fitness and does have
any heritable component, whether that be genetic or cultural,
then a selective process can emerge, and in humans,
as I say, Uh, if we want to understand
the fact that humans are so hyper-social and in
particular this feature of sociality I referred to earlier,
which is that humans, um, the ubiquity to which
we form social and cooperative relationships beyond our kinship
group, beyond our genetic relatives. Uh, To understand that
we really need to understand. In, in deep history,
how is it that this variation in relational wealth
has impacted fitness? Um, WHAT does this variability actually
have uh consequences for evolutionary fitness? And we'd expect
in such a hyper cooperative species that that it
probably does. Right.
So getting into another topic, what are social learning
processes and what different kinds are there?
Just, just, uh, if we're moving on, I should
probably perhaps I, I didn't fully answer your question
in terms of what we know, not just theoretically,
but, but the facts of the matter with, with
relation to wealth, which is that A lot of
my previous work was looking at this in hunter-gatherer
societies, and I'm sure many of your listeners already
know that because we lived as hunter-gatherers for the
vast majority of our evolutionary history, to understand the
selective pressures and the, the drivers of our evolutionary
trajectory, we can study contemporary hunter-gatherers. Now there are
a lot of assumptions in that, which I won't
go into here. But I was working a lot
on trying to understand whether the variability between individuals
and relational wealth had actually testing whether it had
consequences for fitness and the hunter-gatherer societies, and indeed
I found it did. So one of the primary
selection pressures on cooperation and social behavior in our
species was the fact that, Unlike, say, chimpanzees who
rely heavily on collected foods which are readily available
from the environment, so generally the hunting and gathering,
foraging niche that our species began to occupy is
characterized by high unpredictability, right? Leaves are readily abundant,
but getting meat. It's really unpredictable. If you look
at success rates in hunter-gatherer societies of getting meat,
they can vary, but in somewhere like the Hadza,
for example, with big game. It's only every 30
hunts that a man might come back with something.
So if you've got that unpredictability, it doesn't matter
how good a hunter you are, you will not
get food frequently enough to provide for yourself and
your family. So developing these. Social networks, if you
think about dealing with nutritional unpredictability, but whenever you've
got high unpredictability, the best, what you want is
breath, so you want to expand your social network
because it gives you more insurance, so if I've
got, You know, 10 really close friends living in
my camp. As long as one of those 10
finds like a solid bit of meat one day,
I'm gonna get to eat and then when I
get food, I'll share with, with the rest of
my friends, so really, It was this unpredictability in
our shift towards hunting and gathering, foraging niche that
drove the evolution of our hypersociality. And what I
was demonstrating, and what I found was indeed people
with larger social networks in hunter-gatherer societies, um, I
found they had higher BMI, which is exactly what
we'd expect, because they have more stable access to
uh to food. And the, the females had higher
fertility for age. They were having more offspring, so
an actual fitness effect. And interestingly, the males, um,
it was in hunter-gatherer societies, there's a lot of
variation, but typically you see serial monogamy, so it's
quite rare for men to have multiple wives simultaneously
or women to have multiple husbands simultaneously. But the
low proportion of men who had had multiple wives
simultaneously in the communities I worked with were the
men with really high levels of relational wealth or
social capital. So they were actually able to afford
having more offspring and supporting these multiple families because
they have this really large social network, so they
could deal with the unpredictability. So that was, I
would say quite, Nice evidence that OK, having expansion
of the social networks in a hunter-gatherer context actually
increases the evolutionary fitness. Right.
So what are social learning processes then?
Social learning just, well, from an evolutionary perspective, when
we're thinking about. Uh, BEHAVIORAL outputs. These could either
be purely genetically, uh, programmed, so they're just guaranteed
to happen. It, it's already in the DNA of
the organism, or they could require learning where, uh,
I mean, there are different modes of learning, but
that could be individual learning or social learning. So
social learning just refers to any knowledge or skills
or information I gather. From another individual, and that
can, that can take numerous forms. I mean, the
most common. And most relevant things to think about
here are probably emulation, imitation, and teaching. So these
are three modes of social learning. And Imitation, as
you might expect is literally what, as, as we
say colloquially, I observe and I try and do
what the other individual is doing. Emulation is more
goal oriented than process oriented. So with imitation you're
very much copying the process, whereas emulation, OK, I've
seen you've done something, I've seen you've achieved a
particular goal, maybe vaguely seen how you've done it,
but it's about trying to copy achievements of that
goal. And teaching refers to cases where the model.
So the person that I'm learning from actively changes
their behavior to facilitate the transmission of the, of
the skill, and that doesn't have to be giving
me verbal instruction. You might, I might be cracking
a nut and I change the angle at which
I'm doing it, which allows the learner to get
a better view. That would already be classified as
teaching, but the degree to which teaching happens in
the animal kingdom and, And how unique it is
to humans is debated.
Right. So you've told us about 3 different kinds
of social learning processes, imitation, play, and teaching. Uh,
DO we know whether, uh, I, I mean, do
we know which knowledge domains children apply these different
social learning processes in?
Well, I think if you look across human societies,
there's a lot of variation in that, and it
probably relates to the, the sort of variation in
the skill, the knowledge they're picking up. Certainly in
our society, as we all know, we see actually
a lot of enforced teaching, right? We go to
school and we have a teacher model, uh, so
that we can, they can transmit knowledge to us,
um. But you can also see something that seems
to be quite ingrained in the human disposition is
a tendency to imitate. Like anyone who's spent time
with young children, or particularly babies knows that they
just can't help but copy, even if they don't
really know what they're doing, they want to copy
whatever they're saying. Um That's something that's really allowed
to flourish in, you know, we helicopter parents a
lot in our society, but if you look at
a lot of small scale subsistence society, they give
more freedom to the infants and others to imitate,
and that really seems to be fundamental to the
human condition and is actually thought to be, um,
a key driver of. What a key driver of
what has allowed us to have such sophisticated. Culture,
um, I could. Explain that if you like, or
we can talk about it later.
So yeah, tell us more about what you were
mentioning there about social learning.
So So culture, I mean, when we think about
what makes humans unique, a lot of people refer
to the concept of cumulative culture. So let me
first define culture. Culture simply is any Behavioral or.
uh OUTPUT or artifact that is the or knowledge
that is the product of social learning, right? So
that's a really broad definition. I think colloquially we,
we tend to limit it to things like, you
know, food, festivals, religion, clothing, but when you think
about it, those are all products of social learning,
but they're nice. Objective criteria would be outputs of
socially learned, socially transmitted information, knowledge and skills. So
that's culture and we see culture in lots of
species. We see that social learning plays a role.
Um THERE was a seminal study decades ago now
with chimpanzees where they looked at uh different behaviors
across chimpanzee sites and found that There was good
evidence that certain behaviors like certain, that's called, for
example, the grooming hand clasp where two chimps will
hold each other's hands up like this when they're
grooming each other and that's confined to certain populations
and they found a whole host of these. Behaviors
which seemed to be socially transmitted and they were
good. There was good evidence that this was these
were examples of culture and there are many more
since then in many species. But what makes what
some people, a lot of people claim is unique
to human culture and actually the driving force of
our Potentially unique success as a species in colonizing
the globe is that our culture is cumulative, and
one could define that as we have cultural outputs
which are more sophisticated than what one individual could
learn alone. So social learning. Of course, speeds up
the transmission of information, but the question is, are
the skills and knowledge that are passed on socially
in other species, beyond what that individual might or
potentially has the capacity to achieve themselves. And in
humans, of course, you know, if I was a
naive individual, I'm not going to grow up and
just by myself be able to build this computer,
this technological output that we've got, or have this
conversation because I wouldn't have the knowledge and everything
around us is more sophisticated than what an individual
could produce alone. And And the reason social learning
is thought to be fundamental there are our modes
of social learning is how imitation-based it is. So
if you look, at least this is the traditional
argument, I'm presenting some of the key ideas, but
there is debate around these and but. Remember, imitation
is about being process oriented. So humans seem to
be very process oriented and they're paying attention to
all the steps involved in an action rather than
just thinking about that goal and trying to broadly
achieve and emulate the goal. Um, SO that focus
on imitation means. Outputs such as, you know, technologies
or sophisticated knowledge and skills, which have many, many
steps to them. And sometimes those steps on how
they relate to the goal isn't clear. If you're
focused on imitation, you can. You can just copy
the individual you're learning from, whereas if you're focused
on emulation and you're not as process oriented, but
you're just goal oriented, you're going to miss steps
in the middle. A really nice demonstration of this
was this study, I think it was at St.
Andrews, amongst the primatologists there. They had This, um,
Dark black box which had some food, so it
wasn't, it was opaque. You couldn't see through it
and it had some food treats in it and
they did all these random actions like shaking it
and then tapping it hard and there was a
whole number of actions and Then both young children
and chimpanzees, they watched the demonstrator do this and
then they had to get the suite themselves, and
they copied, they shook the box and then they,
they hid it, um. And, and they achieved, they,
they got the suit. Now, then in another condition,
they had a transparent box and they did the
same thing except because the box was transparent. The
children and the chimps were able to see that
actually most of what the experimenter was doing, like
the shaking and the tapping, um, was completely irrelevant
to the achievement of the goal, and all you
had to do was pull a draw or something
like that. Now the interesting thing was that the
chimps just pulled the drawer and got the suit,
but even though it was, you know, it would
have been obvious to, to a child of that
age that most of these other behaviors. We probably
irrelevant, they still imitated them, just for the sake
they've got this sort of blind tendency to imitate
even seemingly useless actions, but what that means is,
is, as we have. Uh, CULTURAL outputs like building
something where sometimes it's very sophisticated and all the
steps and how that relates to the goal isn't
clear. If you imitate, you can get there, whereas
if you emulate and you're not, you, you don't
have this disposition towards copying every stage. You might
miss that out, especially if it's not clear how
a step relates to the goal. So what that
leads to is transmission fidelity. All the steps are
copied and then all the steps are passed on,
which allows these incremental improvements to be copied and
passed on, whereas with more emulation focused species. They're
not copying all the steps, so there's an element
of reinventing the wheel. Yes, they're saying, oh, I
can go to this box and there's a suite.
But they may have to, if it's a complex
process, they're having to work it out for themselves
exactly how to achieve that goal. So you're constantly
going back to stage one. You're just getting that
guiding process of, OK, I need to do something
with this box to get the suite or, or
to build this thing. I need to do something
like that and I saw that guy doing. But
you're having to reinvent the wheel, which slows the
whole process down. It reduces transmission fidelity. So you're
constantly going back as opposed to the ratchet effect
in humans you imitate and you constantly make incremental
improvements. So that's one of a few reasons why
it's thought that this social learning tendency of high
imitation in humans is thought, is thought to be
fundamental to the breadth and And sophistication of our
cultural repertoire of technologies and skills and knowledge.
Right. So about cumulative culture, in what ways is
it related to social structure and knowledge sharing networks?
Yeah, so that's the other side of the story.
You've sort of got. How is the social learning
happen and then also what are the dynamics, who's
teaching who who's transmitting to who? And, and of
course the other side of the other part of
the imitation is of course our language allows for
verbal teaching, which is very good for increasing um.
Transmission of complicated uh processes, um. As for social
structure. What's, you know, some of the initial experiments.
And data was sort of the obvious first step
was seeing something like population size, you know, if
there are more people in the population, there are
more people to potentially learn from, so that should
increase the cultural corpus, and that's what you see.
There was a nice study looking at indigenous populations
in Oceania, Oceania at Contact and looking at the
sophistication of their marine hunting tools and indeed they
found a clear relationships in the larger communities and
the larger subpopulations they had much more sophisticated tools
because there were more models, there was more innovation,
so more people to copy from. But then You
know, humans are more complex and there's migration, and
there, there are different levels of interactions within groups
and we need to be thinking about these things.
Um, SO there was the idea of connectivity and
If, if you imagine subpopulation, so imagine you've got
this large meta population which is broken down into
subpopulations. Um, Which are somewhat isolated, but then there's
migration between them. Well, again, quite intuitive. The more
migration there is between subpopulations, you might think, well,
the more there can be exchange of ideas, and
there was some of this work showing, well, what's
really key here is having um connectivity. Between populations
so that you get exchanged by ideas, you know,
the obvious case being think about the internet and
how that's fundamentally shared, the, the, uh, change, the
sharing of knowledge dynamics, and as a result, you
know, the technological and economic outputs have just grown
exponentially because of that increased connectivity. Now the interesting
part with the social structure and perhaps Less immediately
obvious is that relationship between connectivity and cultural success,
let's say the sophistication of the technologies and knowledge
is not actually linear. It is not that more
connectivity is always better. And I really think the
best way, it's not the easiest experiment to describe,
but, but I'll, I'll do my best. Effectively There
was this study where you have two different. Um,
You you've got the task which is to make
potions and different potions are worth different number of
points and you make these potions by mixing ingredients.
And You've got, say, 50 different um starter potions,
and if you, if you mix them you get
different numbers of points, but if you mix out
of that 50, if you mix 3, there are
3 in particular that if you mix, you actually
get a new potion to add to your 50,
um. And there are two sets of 3 like
that. So with all the potions, you can also
make 2 new potions. If you happen to pick,
let's say, A, B, and C, it produces a
new blue potion and if you happen to predict
X, Y, Z, it produces a red potion. And
Then using the blue potion and red potion in
the next round gives you even more points. And
if you use them with the correct, you know,
if you happen to use the blue potion with,
let's say D&E, you're gonna get another potion, uh,
a green potion, and so on. Now, there are
these two streams, because if you remember, the new
potions you can produce, which are worth more points,
uh, there too. There's the blue potion and the
red potion, and there are basically these two trajectories
you can go up. You can start using the
blue potion, or you could start using the red
potion, or maybe you use them both if you
discover them both. And importantly, when you combine the
blue and the red potion. It can, it can
really produce, uh, very sophisticated, uh, outputs. So does
the experiment make sense so far? Have I vaguely
outlined it now what they did was you had
groups of say. Pairs, you had pairs working, they
play one round where they get to combine some
potions and see how many points they get, or
if they're very lucky, they're going to produce one
of these new potions, but that's very unlikely because
they'd have to get the perfect combination of three.
And the participants don't really know that new potions
could come or, or anything. They just know they're
mixing potions to get more points, that's the aim
of the game. Now in the full connectivity condition,
you'd play in your pair for, um, no, in
the full connectivity condition actually. You, you sort of
play in pairs, but then after each pair had
played after round one, every, each pair speaks together
so everyone knows, OK, you use those potions and
you've got this number of points, we use these,
we've got this number of points, and they share
that information perfectly. So you've got full connectivity, perfect
sharing of information every round. In the partial connectivity
condition it was slightly different. You would play um.
You might play 10 rounds in your pair before.
You move on and there are in round 11,
1 person from each pair moves to another group,
so you're shuffling the pairs every 10 rounds and
say you play 100 rounds, but whereas in full
connectivity you play 100 rounds, but you're, um, each
round you're sharing the information. And what they found
was that partial connectivity actually uh did better in
this experiment, and the reason for this is. Think
how rare it is, because you need to get
the right 3 potions out of like 50, it's
very rare that you're gonna either produce one of
the 2 new potions. So in the full connectivity
um scenario, as soon as one person does that.
They're like, oh, we made this new potion that
makes loads of points. They share that and everyone's
using that. Everyone's tried loads and just been getting
points, but suddenly this pair gets new potion and
everyone does that, and they go up that trajectory.
Whereas in the partial connectivity condition, actually you leave
a bit of time before that information is shared,
and it may be that in those 10 rounds,
someone got the blue potion and someone, another pair
got the red potion. So then once they've shared
the information, they've actually got more of this, these
new ingredients which are super valuable in terms of
points to, to work with. So the idea is
that with full connectivity, as soon as you get
to some good solution, you're going to be stuck
in a trajectory where you're always using that good
solution, but it may be that there are multiple.
There are multiple directions which are very fruitful, and
by having partial connectivity, you're more likely to actually
explore the space of solutions rather than getting stuck
in one trajectory. And now when we think about
our evolutionary history and why this is relevant, when
we think about hunter-gatherers, you're living in these camps,
you know, with say 50 other people, there's a
little bit variation, but they're highly mobile, and hunter
gatherer camps, I think there's a misconception sometimes that
mobility means the whole camp of 50 people moves
together. But what it actually is, you've got nuclear
families or something like a nuclear family within these
camps. And then one nuclear family might move to
another camp. So you've got this constant turnover and
movement, just like in the experiment. You're, it's not
that everyone moves together, you've got one family then
going to a new camp of 50 people and
constant movement, uh, like that, constant fluid composition of
the camps and exchange of ideas, and that's really
optimal because you, you've got partial connectivity, you've got.
Stable, you know, I might be in my family
and we might stay in a camp for a
couple of months, and then we move on. So
that what they're called something like small world networks
is really ideal because you really get in time
for innovation within groups and then sharing of innovations
between groups at a rate which isn't going to
erode exploration of, of possible uh cultural solutions.
That's very interesting. Uh, LET me ask you now
a little bit about breathing systems. What are cooperative
and communal breathing systems?
Um, SO, in the animal kingdom. You've got variation
in. In who looks after offspring. So in mammals,
for example. I can't, I think you're looking at
about 90% are, it's mainly just maternal care. Don't
quote me on that, it could be that there's
only 10% where fathers are involved, but generally, um,
the norm is that it's maternal care, but you
do have still plenty of species. Where individuals other
than the mother help raise the offspring, that might
be the father, but not always. And there, there
are two broad systems, as you mentioned, cooperative and
communal breeding. So cooperative breeding. REFERS to a system
where individuals, or at least traditionally, this is how
the term is used, individuals who are sexually mature
do not breed themselves, but they help someone else
breed. So my helpers are sexually mature other individuals
who are not breeding themselves. And then communal breeding
is where you have multiple breeding females looking after
children together. So they're all mothers and they're helping
one another. They might take turns looking after children
or some of them might go foraging while others
stay and look after the kids, um. So this
is what we see in other species. I mean,
cooperative breeding is particularly interesting because it's sort of.
Uh, YOU know, relates to this problem, well, it
very much does relate to this problem of cooperation
that I mentioned earlier. Which is, well, isn't this
the ultimate Darwinian sacrifice for me to not breed
myself the ultimate cost to my goodness, and help
the breeding of some other individual. So the question
is how on earth could that evolve? And the
answer, as is often the case when we face
cooperation problems. Is it's to do with genetic relatedness,
so a really important concept that again I'm sure
many of your listeners may be familiar with is
that of inclusive fitness. Selection happens at the level
of the gene, natural selection is shaped behavior. To
maximize the propagation of genes. Now, what's good for
the individual isn't always identical to what's good for
their genes, because there are also identical copies of
my genes in my relatives, right? You know, I
have 50% of genes shared with my mother and
siblings and 25% with my nephew and nieces. So
I can sometimes that sacrifice to my own breeding
to help the breeding of a relative could make
sense. So one hypothesis is ecological constraints. If there's
not much, Uh, there aren't many territories available or
the environment's really harsh that I'm unlikely to be
successful in my breeding attempts or there there's a
problem with the sex ratio, so there aren't many
mates available. It may be a better strategy for
me to not risk. Being unsuccessful in my own
breeding attempts, and my best strategy would be to
increase my inclusive fitness by increasing the replication of
my genes by helping the production of offspring to
my family members, usually my mom. So what you
see in a lot of bird species is when
there are these ecological constraints and there's a lack
of available mates or territories. Even after her elder
offspring reach sexual maturity, they'll delay dispersal. And not
set up their own nest, but help her to
produce more offspring. So help in the production of
younger siblings, because that's their best strategy. When when
I talk this way, I'm speaking about strategies and
giving a narrative structure. That's just to explain the
process, of course, evolution has no goal and, and
no organism cares about their inclusive fitness, but there's
been selection on some process, which means that Birds,
when they're unlikely to be successful in breeding themselves,
help their, their parents to produce more offspring, and
that. That helps, you know, answer this question of
how on earth could not breeding yourself and helping
another breed, uh, be beneficial, and, and speaks to
the larger problem of cooperation, as I mentioned in
the animal kingdom. It's certainly, but by far the
most common answer is that you're helping um. Uh,
YOU know, helping genetic relatives, and following, uh, it
was Hamilton who, I don't know whether, I mean,
this is so fundamental that certainly it'd be of
interest to to your readers, uh, to your listeners,
but perhaps it's something that's been discussed loads and
Hamilton's equation and inclusive fitness. Should I outline that,
yes, tell us a little bit about that. Yes,
please.
So this problem of cooperation, as I mentioned, is
if we define cooperation or let's, if we define
altruism as me incurring a cost too much and
the currency here is fitness, me carrying out some
behavior that is costly for my fitness, but beneficial
for the fitness of another. Almost by definition, that
should go extinct because that behavior is reducing my
fitness. That's the big question. If it's reducing my
ability to produce healthy, successful offspring and aiding someone
else's, that person's at a competitive advantage, and I'm
at a disadvantage. So the question is how could
that behavior be selected, which long ago was a
complete mystery, but in what I would say is
the most important. Yeah, the, the most important discovery,
let's say, in the evolutionary social sciences was Hamilton's
theory of inclusive fitness, where he, he solved this
problem, which was that selection happens at the level
of the gene, as I mentioned. So natural selection
does not work to Maximum to, to produce behavioral
strategies that maximize direct fitness, right? It's not just
about maximizing the production of successful offspring that I
have, it's about replicating genes, right? This is what
natural selection works on. So inclusive fitness is my
direct fitness, the replication of my genes through my
own offspring and my indirect fitness, which is the
replication of identical copies of my gene through the
reproduction of my genetic relatives. So Hamilton came up
with this inequality, BR is greater than C. So
if in a given action. The benefit, remember by
definition, I'm incurring a cost to provide a benefit.
If the benefit I provide to you. To your
fitness. Times are, which is our coefficient of relatedness,
so I discount it by how related we are.
So if you're my brother. Our coefficient of relating
this is 0.5%, we share 50% of our genes.
So if BR is greater than C, which is
the cost of my own fitness, my own reproduction,
then my inclusive fitness has actually increased. So this
is nicely demonstrated in a quote by Haldane, which
is, I jump in a rib. AND sacrifice myself
to save 2 brothers or 8 cousins, you know,
if I can carry out some action, if you're
my brother and I can carry out an action
that is going to lead to you having 3
more offspring instead of me having 1. Then you're
having and producing 3 offspring for you discounted by
the fact that we only share 50% of our
genes, so I'm effectively replicating my genes 1.5 times,
and that is more important than replicating my genes.
That's a higher fitness, inclusive fitness payoff than having
one offspring myself, so that, that will clear.
Mhm. Yes, yes, it's all clear. Let me ask
you then, uh, focusing on humans now, which kinds
of women participate in each of these breathing systems,
the cooperative and the communal breeding system? Yeah, and
does it depend on factors like them being sexually
mature and reproductively active or whether they are related
or unrelated to the children?
Sure. Um, SO, yes, the, uh, uh, typically, and
it's probably just a matter of looseness in the
use of the word, humans are referred to as
cooperative breeders. Now actually, that's, I think inappropriate because
as I mentioned, cooperative breeding is. Is meant to
be restricted for cases where sexually mature individuals sacrifice
their own breeding to help someone else's breeding efforts.
So, but the. Importantly, it was recognized that some
form of either cooperative or communal breeding is going
on, and that allomothering, which is a more generic
term for someone other than the mother helping and
raising the offspring, is a fundamental human adaptation. So
there was a famous review paper which found in
every society that had been looked at. Someone other
than the mother does have an effect. The mother
has an effect in every society that's looked at
in whether the child survives or not, you know,
if a child doesn't have a mother because she
dies or abandons the child, the survival prospects go
down. It's very unsurprising. But in every human society
where it's been studied. There is someone in addition
to the mother who has a survival impact for
the child, you know, maybe the most common is
the maternal grandma. So in many societies, if I'm
born and I don't have a maternal grandmother, but,
and you, you're born and you do because she
lives with you, or because She's still alive and
mine isn't your survival prospects are better than mine.
So because of this pattern, we think of humans
as the reproduction is cooperative. Allan mothering is fundamental,
and it's not just the mother that determines survival
prospects. Now, as for who actually provides that care,
it varies loads between societies. But what I'd say
is that cooperative breeding in the traditional sense where
you have an individual who is sexually mature, not
breeding to help another individual breed, that is very
rare. That doesn't really happen when you think about
human societies. Part of the reason that may be
an appropriate term. IS because if grandmothers are really
important, you can see some parallel here. I don't
know how much your listeners will know about the
grandmother hypothesis, but it talks about the evolution of
a post reproductive lifespan. You know, humans are strange
and that we have menopause, which you only see
a couple of other mammals where you actually have.
Uh, POST reproductive women, they can't reproduce themselves, but
they're typically, uh, as I mentioned, very important in
helping raise their, their grandchildren. And uh the idea
that being that the, the post-reproductive life after menopause
got selected for because grandmothers could be such important
helpers. And you could argue that looks something like
cooperative breeding because um these females have passed sexual
maturity and then have evolved this strategy where they're
not breeding themselves, but they're helping produce grandchildren. Now
there are some nuances in that process, which, which
I won't go into here, why, why I don't
think it's perfectly analogous, but, but there's something in
that. But I think in the vast majority of
cases. Um, WHAT you often see in human societies.
Well, you see so much variation, but in, in
many non-industrialized societies, it's very common for young children
to look after other children. So where I work,
it with the hunter-gatherers, you see that children from
around the age of 4 are playing an important
are starting to, they've really got some good caregiving
competency. We had some videos which we showed a
developmental psychologist that my colleague Denise Salali filled. And
The developmental psychologist concluded that this 4 year old
was capable of sensitive caregiving. Sensitive caregiving is when
a caregiver can correctly notice, interpret and respond to
infant signals. So, What we see, what I think
has perhaps been not emphasized enough because there's been
so much debate about the importance of fathers and
grandmothers, is just how much young children who haven't
yet reached sexual maturity play a role in looking
after kids where I work probably starts around 4,
but certainly you see prepubescent girls who offer their
nipple to pacify a baby, um. After children are
less reliant on the infants are less reliant on
their mother's milk, and certainly once they're weaned, they're
spending most of the day with other children. It's
not adults looking after them. So they play a
big role in looking after kids. Grandmothers do in
lots of societies, as I've mentioned. I'm More skeptical
as to the involvement of grandmothers in hunter-gatherer societies,
which is of course a huge area because understanding
the evolution of the post reproductive lifespan relies a
lot on this importance of grandmothering, but I actually,
it varies a lot, but my feeling is that
actually in many cases, Children don't have access to
a grandmother because of life expectancy and the fact
that they're nomadic, so grandmothers are often living elsewhere.
So I'm less convinced of the importance of grandmothers
in many hunter-gatherer societies, at least, but not all.
And fathers, again, highly bearable how involved fathers are
in raising children across societies. I'd say. Usually they
are involved to a degree, but, but that can
go anywhere from the ACA, for example, who were
considered the best dads in the world, and they
found that 50% of daylight hours, an Acker man
is within an arm's length of their infant, and
then at the other end of the spectrum you
have um. Societies without pair bonding where the, the
males aren't providing anything, but that's, that's quite rare
amongst humans. Uh, SO, yeah, I guess in the
short answer to your question is there's huge diversity
in who provides care, and as such, it's quite
difficult to classify the human breeding system. What is
consistent is that it's always cooperative, but as for
whether it fits these formal classifications of cooperative breeding
or communal breeding, I'd say it's it's unique in
that regard. It doesn't neatly fit into either. Right.
So let me ask you now a little bit
about evolutionary psychiatry, psychiatry, which I know is a
topic you're also interested in. So what is it
and in what ways do you think anthropology can
contribute to it more broadly and to understanding the
etiology of mental illness more specifically?
Um, SO evolutionary psychiatry, it's certainly not an alternative
to other modes of psychiatry, uh, and standard psychiatry.
What it is is a compliment to them insofar
as Typically, uh, you know, current psychiatry is heavily
focused on the biomedical model and. Identifying, especially in
psychiatric treatment. Producing treatments that uh deal with neuroendocrine
processes, right? It's a, it's a heavy emphasis and
what are, what are the neurophysiological processes going on
in psychiatric disorders and how can we treat them.
So it's very much a how question, what we
call a proximate question, what's going on in the
brains of people with mental disorders? Um, WHAT neurotransmitter
differences are there, what hormonal differences are there in
signaling. Um, Whereas the evolutionary approach, as with everything,
as in all domains, answers the why question. Well,
why is it the neurotransmitters behave in that way?
Um, WHY is it in certain contexts they're more
likely to behave in that way? Why is it
that genes that predispose um certain neurological processes have
still um are are still around if they lead
to mental disorder. So I think You know, going
back to Devansky's favorite famous quote, nothing in biology
makes sense except in light of evolution to make
sense of the how of the proximate processes, we,
we need the why, um, and I guess at
its most fundamental level, you could say evolutionary psychiatry
investigates. It's not the question of Why do mental
disorders persist and why haven't they been eliminated by
natural selection? And there are many different answers to
that, and that's what evolutionary psychiatry is investigating. And
that's for where anthropology comes in or evolutionary anthropology.
Um, Well, part of it, I guess one, I,
I'll speak to one of several. COMPONENTS that answer,
but Perhaps the most relevant to my work is
this idea of evolutionary mismatch, which uh is that
um an organism or, or at least certain traits
within an organism evolved in a particular environmental context
and when the organism. Faces new environmental conditions. In
many cases those traits may malfunction, leading to maladaptive
or pathological outcomes. The classic example being our genetic
predisposition for preferences for sugary and fatty foods was
great for our ancestors where these foods. WERE scarce
and of high nutritional value. It motivated them to
seek out these important nutritional resources, but now we're
in this other environment where they're abundant rather than
scarce, but we have these mismatched taste preferences, which
lead to all sorts of problems like obesity, heart
disease, and so on. And because humans lived as
hunter-gatherers for the vast majority of our evolutionary history,
The idea is that many of our traits, and
this is, as, as I'm sure most of your
listeners will have heard, this is the fundamental premise
of evolutionary psychology. The idea here is that many
of our traits may be adapted to a hunter
gatherer lifestyle, and now that we find ourselves in
these industrialized contexts, which are vastly different, there's This
may explain why certain neurological processes and psychological processes
may manifest in a way which is uh pathological
or mala maladaptive. So by working with hunter-gatherers, we
can start to see what is different and what
features of the lifestyle. Might be contributing to our
vulnerability to mental disorder in in the industrialized world.
Right. So, in regards to this mismatch hypothesis, uh,
applied to evolutionary psychiatry, what would be good examples
of uh mental illnesses that could, could be the
result of, um, an evolutionary mismatch?
So I think one thing to say off the
back is that there's to really validate any of
that would be, you would need to demonstrate that
the disorder has a lower prevalence or is non-existent
in the hunter gatherer societies and that sort of
research is more or less non-existent. There are a
few studies that have attempted to, you know, literally
2 or 3 that have looked at this, but.
They're still, I would say quite preliminary, very small
sample sizes. You know, it's great that some people
are starting to do this, but I think everyone
recognizes that the methods, sample sizes, and frequency of
these studies would need to increase. So I don't
think there's solid evidence yet, um, that any disorders
are completely mismatched. Uh, BUT I would say. I'm
not so sure that there are any disorders which
would be completely absent in the hunter-gatherer society. I
think many of them may have, well, some of
them may have lower prevalence and certainly some of
them may have different risk factors. So to give
an example, I do a lot of work on
allomothering, and we've spoken about the evolutionary context there
on on maternal support and child rearing. Um, And
if you look in weird societies in weird some
Western educated industrialized rich and democratic societies. Um, SOCIAL,
low social support is. Up there, if not the
most consistently, uh, consistently found as a risk factor
for postnatal depression. Now, in hunter-gatherer communities where allomothering
is normative and, you know, in some of the
work I did, I found that even over just
a 12 hour period, an average infant or toddler
had something like 10 individuals other than the mother
providing hands-on attentive care, and that the mother was
dealing with less than 50% of responses to crying
by herself. Everyone has social support there, right? It's
just so normative when you're living in these communities,
you often got kin around, um, but everyone helps,
which has helped with child rearing. So, interestingly, one
of the few studies that has been done looked
at postnatal depression. And whilst the results were more
complex than this, when it came to social support,
it had no predictive effect. Which is unsurprising because
everyone has loads of social support. So I think
that's an example of a mismatch whereby Allomothering and
cooperative child rearing has been so fundamental, one of
the most fundamental components of human evolutionary history, and
there are probably many aspects of both child and
maternal psychology and sort of postpartum neuroendocrine state. Which
is adapted to be in that system. So it's,
it's no wonder here that a lack of social
support is such a large risk factor for postpartum
depression because we're just not well equipped to deal
with that, and I'm at an age now where
I have friends and relatives having children, and it
feels like, at least in my experience and what
I hear about the, the default. Is that mothers
maybe not uh are not always experiencing clinical depression,
but they are really struggling, it's really tough and
you've got to wonder when it's normal for something
to be extremely, an extreme struggle and extremely distressing.
Something's not quite right there. So that's an example
of a mismatch where I think a new risk
factor has emerged and increased our vulnerability to a
certain disorder. But there are many other hypotheses, but
they really, all of them really lacked testing at
this point.
OK, so, uh Doctor Choudhury, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
find your work on the internet?
Sure, um, so I don't really have social media,
but you can look up my, my website is
nickil Choudhury.co.uk or if you search my name and
research gate, all my papers are open access. So
both on my website or on Research gate, you
can read all of my papers, um, they're available
there to, to anyone who's interested.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, it was great to talk to you too
and thanks for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearauujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank
Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal
Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.